src/2018-03-18-disconnected-world.md, before:

---
title: Disconnected World
author: \@tlvince
date: 2018-03-18
theme: black
---

# We're not as connected as you might think

:::notes
* This is a talk about connectivity
* We're becoming more and more reliant on the internet
* We design and build with the assumption that the internet is always there
* In reality, it's not
:::

# @tlvince

# {data-background-image='/images/ehealth.png' data-background-size='contain'}

# {data-background-image='/images/field.png' data-background-size='contain'}

:::notes
* Design out in the field with users, not in board rooms
:::

# The Next Billion {data-background-image='/images/the-next-billion.png' data-background-size='contain'}

:::notes
* The future of the internet
* One of exponential growth and connectivity in emerging markets
* Let's have a look at the average connectivity across the world
:::

# Europe {data-background-image='/images/europe-80.jpg' data-background-size='contain'}

<small>(This and the following slides borrowed from Ally Long's awesome <cite>[Field-tested interfaces for the next billion – Generate Conf][europe]</cite>. Thanks!)</small>

[europe]: https://speakerdeck.com/allyelle/field-tested-interfaces-for-the-next-billion-generate-conf?slide=7

:::notes
* Starting close to home, around 80% of us are connected to the internet
:::

# USA {data-background-image='/images/usa-75.jpg' data-background-size='contain'}

:::notes
* Our friends in the US are about the same at 75%
* Lets look elsewhere
:::

# South Asia {data-background-image='/images/south-asia-24.jpg' data-background-size='contain'}

:::notes
* Now we're down to 24%
* ~2 billion population, India being the largest
:::

# Sub-Saharan Africa {data-background-image='/images/sub-saharan-africa-22.jpg' data-background-size='contain'}

:::notes
* Down here, we're at 22%
* Of a population of ~1 billion
:::

# This is big {data-background-image='/images/nigeria-population.png' data-background-size='contain' data-background-color='white'}

:::notes
* This is bigger than us
:::

# Things are changing {data-background-image='/images/lomis-stock.jpg'}

:::notes
* The game is changing: lower costs, lower barriers, proliferation of cheap devices
* These people are coming online for the first time
:::

# {data-background-image='/images/ebola-sign.jpg'}

:::notes
* Ebola epidemic began at the end of Dec 2013 in Guinea
* Spread to Sierra Leone and Liberia
* WHO: "the most severe acute public health emergency seen in modern times"
* Toll-free numbers were set up
* Report sick patients, possible Ebola cases, deaths, medical information
:::

# {data-background-image='/images/sense-followup-paper.jpg'}

:::notes
* Severely limited hotline; 1 provider, usually engaged
* Data collection completely paper based
:::

# Design appropriately {data-background-image='/images/call-centre.jpg'}

:::notes
* Lack of stable internet and performant devices forces us to design within more constraints
:::

# Design for all {data-background-image='/images/call-center-surveillance.jpg'}

:::notes
* These users are not necessarily young millennials
* What learnings can we apply from developing for habitually connected people?
:::

# {data-background-image='/images/long-form.jpg' data-background-size='contain'}

:::notes
* Gives us the chance to rethink; back to first principles
* HAT
* Break up long forms
* Big selectable elements, not long, fancy drop downs
* Build trust
* Communicate offline states
* Allow people to try things out; show clear undo steps
:::

# {data-background-image='/images/split-form.jpg' data-background-size='contain'}

# Offline First {data-background-image='/images/offline-dino.gif' data-background-color='white'}

:::notes
* We can't keep building things with the mindset that the internet is always there
* Limited access to the internet forces us to think about designing for offline
* Lack of internet should not be considered an error
:::

# Offline can be seamless {data-background-image='/images/direct-delivery.jpg'}

:::notes
* Network connectivity is intermittent at best. Deal with it.
* Lack of connectivity should be considered just another state
* Our products/projects should just seamlessly work offline
* But we have to develop trust
  * Will my data still be saved offline?
  * Will my data still be secure?
  * Clear communication
:::

# {data-background-image='/images/man-with-tablet.jpg'}

:::notes
* Drivers out on the road for ages
* Gather data offline, seamlessly and opportunistically sync whenever possible
* Store offline, sync P2P
:::

# {data-background-image='/images/instagram-blog.png' data-background-color='white' data-background-size='contain'}

:::notes
* But this isn't just about the Next Billion or people in Nigeria
* It happens to everyone, all the time:
  * In the tube
  * Flights
  * In conferences where too many people are connected at once
* 4G is not as pervasive as you think
* Excellent blog post by Instagram Engineering
* Can upload, comment on, perform any actions as usual, but queued
* Access to the network is prioritised by task, importance to the user
:::

# Offline first is a social movement # {data-background-image='/images/men-with-phones.jpg'}

:::notes
* Offline first is an enabler
* It offers universal access to the internet regardless of how good your connection is
* Democratises data
:::

# {data-background-image='/images/gis-data-collectors.jpg'}

:::notes
* How many times have you seen “Error Establishing A Database Connection" (Wordpress error)
  * Centralised, single point of failure
* People are becoming more de-sensitised to decentralised, distributed systems
  * Bitcoin, blockchain
* What happens when your favourite unicorn startup is bought or shut down?
  * Where does my data go? Can I still access it?
:::

# {data-background-image='/images/nc-cold-store.jpg'}

:::notes
* NC Cold store (Kogi or Nasarawa)
* Data mandated by government that it should be hosted in country
* Distributed system problem; decentralised data storage
* In-house data collection for performance
* Synced back to the mothership for analysis
:::

# Takeaways

1. Billions are coming online  
2. Offline can be seamless  
3. Offline is a social movement

# Thanks

@tlvince

# Credits

- [Internet access grows worldwide but remains higher in advanced economies ][] --- Paw Research Centre
- [Field-tested interfaces for the next billion – Generate Conf][] --- Ally Long ([The Next Billon](#/europe) slides, [Design for all](#/section-4) slides)
- [Improving performance with background data prefetching][] --- Instagram Engineering
- [eHealth Africa][] --- selected imagery
- [Field Intelligence][] --- selected imagery

[Internet access grows worldwide but remains higher in advanced economies ]: http://www.pewglobal.org/2016/02/22/internet-access-growing-worldwide-but-remains-higher-in-advanced-economies/
[Improving performance with background data prefetching]: https://instagram-engineering.com/improving-performance-with-background-data-prefetching-b191acb39898
[Field-tested interfaces for the next billion – Generate Conf]: https://speakerdeck.com/allyelle/field-tested-interfaces-for-the-next-billion-generate-conf
[eHealth Africa]: https://www.ehealthafrica.org/
[Field Intelligence]: https://www.fieldintelligence.org/

Commit message:

chore: rm per-deck hook now title image is in yaml
See https://github.com/jgm/pandoc/pull/5981

src/2018-03-18-disconnected-world.md, after:

---
title: Disconnected World
author: \@tlvince
date: 2018-03-18
theme: black
title-slide-attributes:
  data-background-image: /images/kano-dala-hill.jpg
---

# We're not as connected as you might think

:::notes
* This is a talk about connectivity
* We're becoming more and more reliant on the internet
* We design and build with the assumption that the internet is always there
* In reality, it's not
:::

# @tlvince

# {data-background-image='/images/ehealth.png' data-background-size='contain'}

# {data-background-image='/images/field.png' data-background-size='contain'}

:::notes
* Design out in the field with users, not in board rooms
:::

# The Next Billion {data-background-image='/images/the-next-billion.png' data-background-size='contain'}

:::notes
* The future of the internet
* One of exponential growth and connectivity in emerging markets
* Let's have a look at the average connectivity across the world
:::

# Europe {data-background-image='/images/europe-80.jpg' data-background-size='contain'}

<small>(This and the following slides borrowed from Ally Long's awesome <cite>[Field-tested interfaces for the next billion – Generate Conf][europe]</cite>. Thanks!)</small>

[europe]: https://speakerdeck.com/allyelle/field-tested-interfaces-for-the-next-billion-generate-conf?slide=7

:::notes
* Starting close to home, around 80% of us are connected to the internet
:::

# USA {data-background-image='/images/usa-75.jpg' data-background-size='contain'}

:::notes
* Our friends in the US are about the same at 75%
* Lets look elsewhere
:::

# South Asia {data-background-image='/images/south-asia-24.jpg' data-background-size='contain'}

:::notes
* Now we're down to 24%
* ~2 billion population, India being the largest
:::

# Sub-Saharan Africa {data-background-image='/images/sub-saharan-africa-22.jpg' data-background-size='contain'}

:::notes
* Down here, we're at 22%
* Of a population of ~1 billion
:::

# This is big {data-background-image='/images/nigeria-population.png' data-background-size='contain' data-background-color='white'}

:::notes
* This is bigger than us
:::

# Things are changing {data-background-image='/images/lomis-stock.jpg'}

:::notes
* The game is changing: lower costs, lower barriers, proliferation of cheap devices
* These people are coming online for the first time
:::

# {data-background-image='/images/ebola-sign.jpg'}

:::notes
* Ebola epidemic began at the end of Dec 2013 in Guinea
* Spread to Sierra Leone and Liberia
* WHO: "the most severe acute public health emergency seen in modern times"
* Toll-free numbers were set up
* Report sick patients, possible Ebola cases, deaths, medical information
:::

# {data-background-image='/images/sense-followup-paper.jpg'}

:::notes
* Severely limited hotline; 1 provider, usually engaged
* Data collection completely paper based
:::

# Design appropriately {data-background-image='/images/call-centre.jpg'}

:::notes
* Lack of stable internet and performant devices forces us to design within more constraints
:::

# Design for all {data-background-image='/images/call-center-surveillance.jpg'}

:::notes
* These users are not necessarily young millennials
* What learnings can we apply from developing for habitually connected people?
:::

# {data-background-image='/images/long-form.jpg' data-background-size='contain'}

:::notes
* Gives us the chance to rethink; back to first principles
* HAT
* Break up long forms
* Big selectable elements, not long, fancy drop downs
* Build trust
* Communicate offline states
* Allow people to try things out; show clear undo steps
:::

# {data-background-image='/images/split-form.jpg' data-background-size='contain'}

# Offline First {data-background-image='/images/offline-dino.gif' data-background-color='white'}

:::notes
* We can't keep building things with the mindset that the internet is always there
* Limited access to the internet forces us to think about designing for offline
* Lack of internet should not be considered an error
:::

# Offline can be seamless {data-background-image='/images/direct-delivery.jpg'}

:::notes
* Network connectivity is intermittent at best. Deal with it.
* Lack of connectivity should be considered just another state
* Our products/projects should just seamlessly work offline
* But we have to develop trust
  * Will my data still be saved offline?
  * Will my data still be secure?
  * Clear communication
:::

# {data-background-image='/images/man-with-tablet.jpg'}

:::notes
* Drivers out on the road for ages
* Gather data offline, seamlessly and opportunistically sync whenever possible
* Store offline, sync P2P
:::

# {data-background-image='/images/instagram-blog.png' data-background-color='white' data-background-size='contain'}

:::notes
* But this isn't just about the Next Billion or people in Nigeria
* It happens to everyone, all the time:
  * In the tube
  * Flights
  * In conferences where too many people are connected at once
* 4G is not as pervasive as you think
* Excellent blog post by Instagram Engineering
* Can upload, comment on, perform any actions as usual, but queued
* Access to the network is prioritised by task, importance to the user
:::

# Offline first is a social movement # {data-background-image='/images/men-with-phones.jpg'}

:::notes
* Offline first is an enabler
* It offers universal access to the internet regardless of how good your connection is
* Democratises data
:::

# {data-background-image='/images/gis-data-collectors.jpg'}

:::notes
* How many times have you seen “Error Establishing A Database Connection" (Wordpress error)
  * Centralised, single point of failure
* People are becoming more de-sensitised to decentralised, distributed systems
  * Bitcoin, blockchain
* What happens when your favourite unicorn startup is bought or shut down?
  * Where does my data go? Can I still access it?
:::

# {data-background-image='/images/nc-cold-store.jpg'}

:::notes
* NC Cold store (Kogi or Nasarawa)
* Data mandated by government that it should be hosted in country
* Distributed system problem; decentralised data storage
* In-house data collection for performance
* Synced back to the mothership for analysis
:::

# Takeaways

1. Billions are coming online
2. Offline can be seamless
3. Offline is a social movement

# Thanks

@tlvince

# Credits

- [Internet access grows worldwide but remains higher in advanced economies ][] --- Paw Research Centre
- [Field-tested interfaces for the next billion – Generate Conf][] --- Ally Long ([The Next Billon](#/europe) slides, [Design for all](#/section-4) slides)
- [Improving performance with background data prefetching][] --- Instagram Engineering
- [eHealth Africa][] --- selected imagery
- [Field Intelligence][] --- selected imagery

[Internet access grows worldwide but remains higher in advanced economies ]: http://www.pewglobal.org/2016/02/22/internet-access-growing-worldwide-but-remains-higher-in-advanced-economies/
[Improving performance with background data prefetching]: https://instagram-engineering.com/improving-performance-with-background-data-prefetching-b191acb39898
[Field-tested interfaces for the next billion – Generate Conf]: https://speakerdeck.com/allyelle/field-tested-interfaces-for-the-next-billion-generate-conf
[eHealth Africa]: https://www.ehealthafrica.org/
[Field Intelligence]: https://www.fieldintelligence.org/
